EHR-Based Diabetes Prediction Using Machine Learning
Overview
This project leverages Electronic Health Records (EHR) data to predict whether a patient is likely to develop diabetes using machine learning models. We explore two different approaches:

Logistic Regression (Baseline Model)
Random Forest Classifier (Improved Model)
Using real-world synthetic patient data, we analyze key health indicators such as age, BMI, past medical history, and hospital visits to train predictive models. Our findings show that Random Forest significantly outperforms Logistic Regression in this task.

Dataset
We use synthetic EHR data generated by Synthea, including the following files:

patients.csv – Contains demographic data (age, gender).
conditions.csv – Lists diagnosed medical conditions.
encounters.csv – Tracks hospital visits.
observations.csv – Includes BMI and other lab measurements.
Selected Features for Prediction:
AGE – Age of the patient.
GENDER – Categorical feature (Male = 0, Female = 1).
Condition_Count – Number of past medical conditions recorded.
Hospital_Visits – Number of encounters in the hospital system.
BMI – Body Mass Index, an important diabetes risk factor.
Modeling Approach
1. Logistic Regression (Baseline Model)
Logistic Regression is a linear model used for binary classification. It assumes a straight-line relationship between input features and the probability of diabetes.

Key Findings:
Logistic Regression achieved 64% accuracy.
The model struggled with imbalanced data, often predicting the majority class (non-diabetic patients) more frequently.
It assumes a linear decision boundary, which may not capture complex relationships in medical data.
Why it performed poorly:

EHR data is highly non-linear—features like BMI, medical history, and hospital visits interact in complex ways.
Feature dependencies—For example, the impact of BMI on diabetes risk changes with age.
Imbalanced dataset—Favors the majority class without additional tuning.
2. Random Forest Classifier (Improved Model)
Random Forest is an ensemble learning algorithm that builds multiple decision trees and aggregates their results. It handles non-linear relationships well and is robust to imbalanced data.

Key Findings:
96% accuracy—Significantly outperformed Logistic Regression.
Automatically detects feature interactions, making it well-suited for EHR data.
Less sensitive to imbalanced classes, as it considers multiple decision paths.
Reduces overfitting by averaging multiple trees.
Why it performed better:
Non-linear decision boundaries—Diabetes risk isn't a simple function of age or BMI, but a combination of factors.
Handles missing data well—Can make predictions even when some patient records are incomplete.
Works well with categorical & continuous features—Doesn’t assume a specific data distribution.
Feature importance ranking—Identifies the most critical predictors of diabetes.

Performance Comparison
Model	Accuracy
Logistic Regression	64%
Random Forest	96%
How to Run the Project
1. Install Dependencies
Ensure you have Python and required libraries installed:

bash
Copy
Edit
pip install pandas scikit-learn numpy matplotlib
2. Run the Model
Execute the Python script:

bash
Copy
Edit
python diabetes_prediction.py
Expected Output
You should see:

Model accuracy scores
Feature importance ranking
Performance metrics (Precision, Recall, F1-Score)
Future Improvements
Try other models: Gradient Boosting, XGBoost, Neural Networks
Expand dataset: Add more clinical variables (HbA1c, glucose levels)
Optimize feature engineering: Extract more insights from EHR records

Conclusion
This project demonstrates the power of machine learning in healthcare by predicting diabetes risk using real-world EHR data.
Logistic Regression struggles with the complexity of medical data and class imbalance.
Random Forest excels by capturing non-linear relationships, making it a much better model for EHR-based predictions.

This is just the beginning! With more features and tuning, machine learning models can revolutionize clinical decision-making.